---
layout: default
title: Using Cascading Style Sheets (CSS)
priority: 1
---

# {{ page.title }}

Using [CSS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS) is the default way of styling Vaadin applications.

## A simple example

When you create a new project, a default CSS file is created to help you get started. Here is an example of some CSS:

#### myproject-theme.css
```css
label { color: green; }
label.clicked { color: red; }
```

In this case we are style an element of type **label** to have a text color of <span style="color:green">green</span> and 
when the user clicks on the label and a new *css-class* is added to the label it becomes <span style="color:red">red</span>. This is just a very simple example of how CSS can be used.

For more information about the CSS syntax checkout [this excellent guide](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS).

## Where should I put my CSS files?

CSS files should be put in the ``src/main/webapp/frontend/styles`` directory. 

This directory is specially treated by the {{ site.data.strings["vaadin_plugin"].title }} and allows you to use CSS files to style also parts of the [Shadow DOM](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/web-components/shadowdom) leveraging the plugin's [auto-wrapping feature](#supporting-styling-shadow-dom-with-css-auto-wrapping). 

If you put CSS files outside of this directory your CSS will not be applied to the [Shadow DOM](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/web-components/shadowdom).

## Injecting CSS files into your Vaadin application

The way you tell Vaadin about a new CSS file is to annotate a Vaadin class with the [@HTMLImport](https://vaadin.com/api/platform/com/vaadin/flow/component/dependency/HtmlImport.html) annotation.

For example, when you create a new project your UI class will look like this:

#### MyProjectUI.java
```java
@HtmlImport("frontend://styles/myproject-theme.html")
@Theme(Lumo.class)
public class MyProjectUI extends UI { }
```

On **line 1** you can see that we are referencing our [myproject-theme.css](#myprojectthemecss) file. 

But you might also notice that we are using the **.html** file extension instead of **.css**. This is because of the [auto-wrapping feature](#supporting-styling-shadow-dom-with-css-auto-wrapping) described below.

## Supporting styling *Shadow DOM* with CSS auto-wrapping

If you just add a link to your CSS file (for example with the [@Stylesheet](https://vaadin.com/api/platform/com/vaadin/flow/component/dependency/StyleSheet.html) annotation) you will only be able to style elements visible in the standand DOM. 

Many of the Vaadin components today are leveraging something called a [Shadow DOM](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/web-components/shadowdom) which hides the element implementations from CSS. 

To be able to also style the internals of the Vaadin components the {{ site.data.strings["vaadin_plugin"].title }} will wrap any CSS file located in ``src/main/webapp/frontend/styles`` into the following HTML file:

#### myproject-theme.html (generated from [myproject-theme.css](myprojectthemecss))
```html
<!-- This is a autogenerated html file for myproject-theme.css. Do not edit this file, it will be overwritten. -->
<custom-style>
    <style>
        label { color: green; }
        label.clicked { color: red; }
    </style>
</custom-style>
```

The convertion from CSS to HTML is done by the ``vaadinConvertStyleCssToHtml`` automatically whenever you are packaging your application so you don't have to separately thing about running the task.

The final generated HTML wrappers are located in ``build/frontend/styles``.


